Hello everyone and welcome to part one.
Javascript basics and this lecture are going to be going to our browser Google Chrome and then opening
up our consul and walking through just the very basics of javascript.
Things such as basic data types and a few basic methods are going to jump through my browser now to
get started.
OK here I am at my browser I'm just set a new empty tab and I've also gone Incognito to make sure I
don't get any javascript alerts if I'm logged into G-mail and I would suggest you do the same if you're
using a Gmail account but what you're going to do is anywhere on the page right click and then go all
the way down to where it says inspects.
Click on that and you should see something like this probably not a zoomed in as mine so more likely
you'll see something that looks like this.
Then you can click on cons. And you should see the consul here for your browser and this is where we
can directly type in javascript code and see how the browser interprets it and executes it.
Let's start off with the hello world of javascript which is an alert.
So we call alert which is a function and then you pasan a string.
So a string is going to start off with a set of quotes.
Here we have double quotes.
And then whatever string you want to do.
So in our case it's going to be something like Hello world.
And you can see I've actually typed this before which is why the javascript conses kind of helped me
out there.
But I'm going to hit enter and we should see a little pop up and here at the top of the page I see new
tab says hello world and there's a little click here that says prevent this page from creating additional
dialogs.
Do not check that box.
Otherwise you won't be able to see any more of your alerts.
So then click OK.
And we get undefined here and will be explaining a lot more about function input and output and how
that all works for now.
Congratulations you've written your very first line of javascript code.
Let's continue on by talking about basic data types.
So first before we actually start that I want to show you how you can write a comment in javascript
and a comment and Javascript is just two forward slashes and then anything beyond this.
So anything here is a comments and if I hit enter here basically nothing is going to be executed because
that was all it comments.
So right now let's start off with basic data types.
OK.
The first basic data type are numbers and numbers can be integers such as 10 floating point numbers
maybe a like twenty point two which means it has a decimal and even things like negative numbers so
negative thirteen point four or something.
Note that javascript unlike some other languages treat treats these all the same as numbers.
So regardless if it's a floating point with decimal a whole integer or a negative number they all are
treated as numbers in javascript.
There's no distinction between them at least for our very basic use cases.
We don't need to worry about that then next there are strings.
The strings are basically strings wrapped in quotes.
So we've already seen one.
We've seen hello world so here we have the string hello world and it gets output and then we can also
even wrap digits.
But note here the difference.
If I wrap this number 10 in quotes it now becomes a string instead of an actual number.
Now we'll talk a lot more also about how javascript compares strings like this to a number like this.
It's unlike some other languages so I have to keep an eye out for that.
OK so those are strings.
And up next I want to show you booleans.
So if you have encountered booleans from other programming languages there are basically logical values
that can stand for true or false and in javascript's it's the lower case.
True or all lowercase false and those are the booleans and there's two more things I want to show you
which are undefined and NULL.
And we'll talk again a lot more about these in a future lecture.
But I just want you to be aware that undefined the null are not exactly the same thing but they are
available as basic data types in javascript's.
OK let's take a step back and focus in on numbers.
So those were over here and blue syntax highlighting numbers.
We can actually use javascript as a basic calculator but before we do that I want to show you how you
can clear your consul to clear cons..
Just type in clear and then close parentheses at the end of that enter and the console will be cleared
for you.
OK so javascript as a basic calculator can do addition so I can say things like two plus two.
You see a response for I can do subtraction five minus 1 multiplication three times two.
That's an asterix for multiplication there.
I can do division for instance 10 divided by two using five.
And what happens if I do two divided by five it gives me 0.4 other programming languages sometimes will
actually give you the decimal amount.
Javascript does do true division here.
So 2 divided by 5 does give you the correct answer of 0.4.
Then if we wanted to exponents that's two sets of Asterix.
So for instance if I wanted to do the power of four that's going to be Asterix Asterix four and then
that equals 16 which is two times two times two times two or two power of four.
And then the last mathematical operation which you may or may not be familiar with the Pindi how new
your programming is what's known as the Maggiolo or modify function or really operations not really
function.
And basically what this does is it returns the remainder of a division.
So for example if I say 15 divided by 14 and hit enter I get 1 point 0 7 et cetera.
Some very large decimal.
But if I were to think about this in terms of remainder I would know that 15 divided by 14 is 14.
Remainder 1.
Now if I wanted some mathematical operation to only return that remainder that can be shown as the mod
operation or the modular operation which in most programming programming languages it's shown as a percent
sign.
So 15 maade 14 returns one because it's 14 remainder 1.
Let's show you another example.
For instance 6 maade to return 0.
And that's because 2 goes into six evenly three times.
So three remainder zero.
Now if I do something like 6 model four I get remainder two because it's going to be for remainder two
to get six.
So again this model function this operation just gives you back the remainder.
OK.
So we discussed numbers and how to treat javascript using a basic calculator.
Let's clear our consul again.
And now let's talk about strings and some very basic operations that you can do strings or javascript.
So strings are just sequences of characters in each element or character has an indexed position.
So let's start for strain that just says Django is cool.
And I can actually concatenate strings together and concatenate means just bring together so I can say
something like Django
and I concatenate with plus is super cool.
It enter.
And then I see Django is super cool.
But look what happened here on that concatenation.
There's no space between Django and is because there was no space at the end of Django or at the beginning
is there.
So if I want to concatenate these two strings to make sense I can put a space there for is.
And then when I concatenate those two together both the plus sign I see Django is super cool so far
pretty basic stuff.
If I grab the actual length of a string it called the length attribute.
So I say something like Django and then call thaw length off of that string and you can see that the
consul actually helps you out some autocomplete.
And then here I can see there are six elements or six characters in the sequence which is the string.
One two three four five six.
Great.
And then we can also check if whitespace counts by saying something like X Space X length and you see
we get three.
So whitespace also counts.
It's going to count those spaces.
Now there's also escape characters and strings that are really common.
For example if I say something like Hello backslash and starts a new line and then hit enter here I
can see that this special escape character stands for beginning a new line.
So hello and then I start a new line with backslash and and then everything else goes on a new line.
Another escape character is tab.
So I can say hello backslash.
See for TAB give me a tab and this will insert a tab essentially just for spaces there.
And then finally I can also do quotes.
I can say hello and then I will say quotes back slash enter and this is just a way to input what's inside
of a javascript strings I only make that probably a little more clear by not using the word quotes there
but it's a backslash quote and then I can say something like jelly and I can see that the double quote
is now inside the string.
And the reason you would need an escape character is if he didn't have that backslash there for the
escape javascript would think that you want it to just end the actual string right there at that first
double quote.
But instead if you want to escape it and actually have quotes inside you can use that escape character
so that's useful if you're trying to say something like She said quote While the law and quote and then
finish off the string.
All right then finally I want to talk about actually indexing individual characters or elements.
So indexing starts at zero.
So if I have hello and I want to grab a certain character off of that string based off of its index
location for instance I want to grab H.
Well that starts at index 0.
So if I do.
Hello.
And then with square brackets and put a zero there I get H-back OK before we continue on.
Let's see a few more examples of indexing with a string.
So if I have a string again hello and I want to grab the letter O from this will I just have to count
starting with index 0.
So it's going to be aitches 0 is 1.
The first L is to the second Ellas 3.
And then the 0 is the index for and it returns.
Oh and we're going to learn a lot more about indexing strings later on.
But what I want you to do is take a random string maybe something like look at the dog and then see
if you can through indexing calls grab the letter D from this.
So pause the video see what number you have to provide to grab the letter D just to practice.
OK.
So hopefully you're able to get it.
Let's see.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 and there's the letter D.
OK.
Now let's continue on by talking about variables going to clear the cons. And let's talk about variables.
In javascript.
So the general form of variables in javascript look something like this.
You say the keyword they are then you have the variable name and then you're going to say it's equal
to whatever you want the actual value to be and then a semi-colon till it.
Javascript no.
That you're done in javascript is actually really flexible these days on what has the end of a semi-colon
and what doesn't have the end of a semi-colon.
For almost all things.
Now you actually don't need the semi-colon anymore but we'll keep putting it into place and we'll talk
about it a little more in a future lecture.
But that's the very basic format.
So let's actually get some practice.
I'm going to make a variable called bank account.
And unlike some other programming languages javascript uses camel case and with camel case means is
if you have multiple words in a variable name the next word that you put in is going to have a capital
letter.
So we see bank next word has a capital letter and if I want to add something else this maybe the city
was in I would then put another capital letter but another capital letter etc..
So that's what it looks like Swiss bank account.
And then I would say is equal to 100 semi colon.
So now I have a variable bank account which means if I actually call bank account I'll get back the
number or value I assigned to it.
So then let's make a variable called deposit and we'll set it equal to 15.
And now let's actually do some logic with this.
So I will say variable total is equal to my accounts plus my deposit and looks like it needs to be in
my bank account.
So sorry about that bank account plus deposit.
There it is.
So we saw we have an error here account is not fine because I never defined something called account
only to find something called bank account.
So now here I see variable totalistic equal to bank account plus deposit so if I show my total I get
150 100 plus 50.
OK.
So let's show a couple more examples of variables.
Want to clear my cons..
Let's say I create a variable called a greeting and this one's going to be a string now I'll say something
like.
Welcome back Colin.
And then I'm going to make another variable called name and you should go ahead and put your name here.
Or put in Jose and then we're going to say an alert.
So we should see a prompt come up and I'm going to do a greeting Plus remember we can concatenate strings
name hit enter and now a seat says welcome back Jose.
On the very top here.
Great.
So if I get a variable such as we are in I don't ever define it.
So let's do that something like my variable and I hit enter.
I get undefined.
So undefined means you created something but you never actually defined it.
A No.
On the other hand.
So for instance if I make a variable called bonus and assign it to the keyword null that's going to
be actually nothing that you said.
And that's really the difference between null and undefined undefined means something was created.
But it was never actually the find.
So this variable exists but it was never defined.
In the case of my variable No.
On the other hand means that you're actually setting nothing to this variable on purpose.
So here we have something as undefined created but never the find in the case of this variable called
bonus.
We actually assigned it nothing or no.
So it is defined as Nil instead of just being undefined.
Now don't worry too much right now that all of these actions output undefined.
That just means that there was nothing to output for all the lines of code we were writing.
Now before we end this lecture I want to show you just a few basic javascript methods that we talk about.
We already know alert.
But just to reiterate alert is going to alert and pop up something in the browser so it will say Alert
Hey enter and it alerts appear and we'll be using those a lot to check our work later on in the section
of the course.
The other thing I want to show you is actually outputting something to the console.
So a lot of the stuff we've been doing has never been outputting things to the console phone output
something to the console.
I can use console that log and then whenever I want to output.
So let's say hey I'm in the console Let's enter what we see here that says hey I'm in the consul and
that's me.
I'll put something to the consul.
And then finally we have prompt so prompt is an actual key.
So I will say we'll start off with just prompt and we'll say enter something enter and at the very top
of the page I'll say enter something and he can just enter whatever.
OK.
And we see the output here.
If you want to say this is a variable you can do something like the.
Age is equal to prompt.
And then we'll say enter your age enter and up here it says enter your age so we can enter age let's
say where 90 years old with the good life.
OK.
And now Ill say undefined but if I call age again it gives me back 90 and note that it gives it back
to me as a string.
OK.
So we covered a lot here but it was all the basics.
Hopefully this didn't seem too complicated.
I know it's a lot of stuff right now so if you need a review you can always check out the javascript
basics that javascript that's under javascript level 1 folder so you can actually go and practice on
your own the various commands that we did in this lecture.
OK thanks everyone and I'll see you in the next lecture.
Where are we going to be continuing our discussion of the basics of javascript.